Aero 2026

Background:
SAE Aero West is a yearly competition which was held in Fort Worth, Texas this year. This collegiate competition features teams from countries across the globe like China, India, and Mexico. This competition features three competition classes; my team competed in the advanced competition. The advanced competition is focused on designing an autonomous vtol plane to complete a payload pickup and drop off mission. This was our school’s first time competing in the advanced class competition but we weren’t there to participate, we were there to win.

In this design, build, fly competition you are scored in 3 sections, a 30 page design review where we discuss our design methodology, a 15 minute flight demonstration readiness review presentation where we demonstrate why we are prepared to fly on competition day, and competition scoring.

Our mission:
Create an autonomous VTOL plane that carries, delivers, and retrieves a payload. We defined our mission to comprise six stages: horizontal takeoff, transition to vertical flight, payload delivery, payload capture, horizontal landing. While this is our mission plan, points are only scored upon takeoff, payload drop off and pick up, and landing with the majority of points scored with the payload operations. Payload pickup is scored especially strongly because a payload has to be dropped off in a previous flight to be picked up. The entire payload + plane could weigh up to 3.5 lbs and your points were multiplied based on how much your payload weighed. So, you were incentivised to optimise your plane weight to allow your payload to weigh as much as possible.

My role on this project was to lead the payload team. We decided to design our payload to be an omni wheel kiwi car. This design would allow the dropped off payload to move out of the way while the payload getting picked up could take its place automatically. While we could have had the plane move between the payloads, this design minimizes the electronics needed in the plane and therefore saves plane weight. The kiwi car setup allows for precise movement which makes it easier for us to position correctly and align our capture mechanism.

The plane was able to land in a relatively similar position every time on delivery, when the plane landed our payload would lower and drive to a preprogrammed position away from the plane. Each different payload would have its own holding zone. Once the area was clear, the payload on the landing zone would make its way, and attach itself to the plane. To locate the plane we used a combination of a bluetooth ultrawideband module which works like an airtag, and machine vision with april tags. The “airtag” gives the payload a general direction of the plane but is not accurate at close range, and was used to get under the plane. We then transitioned to using the machine vision camera which would give us a precise location.

One of the things that I am proud of is the system design. Our system was not built in one day but developed over the course of the project with upgrades every version. In version V0, our goal was to create a proof of concept and trial the movement of our car. All we had here was an Arduino Uno wired to 3 omni motors. We continued by adding slowly, asking questions and solving problems. How do we talk to the plane? We are running out of GPIO ports, what board can we switch to? This process taught me to iterate slowly and test before integrating something new. Learn more about our payload system here.

While our payload functioned incredibly well, our competition did not go as planned. Of 22 teams, we placed 8th in the report and 5th in the readiness review, but we did not score points at competition. Due to thunderstorms much of competition was spent sheltering from the storm instead of getting flight attempts in. We were only able to get two flight attempts, neither of which were able to score points. Due to us going out of bounds on one attempt and being unable to get gps signal to our plane in another, neither attempt scored. Tallied together, our overall score was 9th place.

Even though this was not the result that my team was shooting for, I am proud of the work that I did and we learned key details that we will take with us in upcoming years of this competition. This year we did system testing of the plane and payload systems but we did not do compete acceptance testing to our design requirements, this is something that I plan to change for next year. We need to be able to complete the entire verification and validation V to be confident in our performance at competition. I also learned that this competition is not an optimization problem. To complete this mission autonomously is a difficult challenge, this year across 22 teams not one team completed a payload capture. Only after being able to do our full mission at a high completion rate can we think about optimizing the weight savings and scoring.


